Document how OG handles access and permissions (#693)
Gizra/og: docs/access.md

Access control for groups and group content
===========================================

Controlling access to groups and group content is one of the most important
aspects of building a group based project. Having separate access rules for
different groups and the content in them is more complex than the standard role
and permission based access system built into Drupal core so Organic Groups has
extended the core functionality to make it more flexible and, indeed, _organic_
for developers to design their access control systems.

Group level permissions
-----------------------

The first line of defense is group level access control.
Group level permissions apply to the group as a whole. OG ships with a number
of permissions that control basic group and membership management tasks such as:
- Administration permissions such as `update group`, `delete group`, `manage
  members` and `approve and deny subscription`.
- Membership permissions such as `subscribe` and `subscribe without approval`
  which can be granted to non-members.

Developers can define their own group level permissions by implementing an event

> listener that subscribes to the `og.permission` event and instantiating

Reviewer: Normally I'd say let's use the interface but it seems like we chose the EVENT_NAME poorly:
```suggestion
listener that subscribes to the `PermissionEventInterface::EVENT_NAME` event and instantiating
```

        // The human readable permission title, to show to site builders in the UI.
        'title' => $this->t('Set group privacy'),
        // An optional description providing extra information.
        'description' => $this->t('Users can only join a private group when invited by an existing member.'),
        // The roles to which this permission applies by default when a new
        // group is created.
        'default roles' => [OgRoleInterface::ADMINISTRATOR],
        // Whether or not this permission has security implications and should
        // be restricted to trusted users only.
        'restrict access' => TRUE,
      ])
    );
  }

}
```

The list of group level permissions that are provided out of the box by Organic
Groups can be found in
`\Drupal\og\EventSubscriber\OgEventSubscriber::provideDefaultOgPermissions()`.

Group content entity operation permissions
------------------------------------------

In addition to group level permissions we also need to control access to CRUD
operations on group content entities. Depending on the group requirements the
creation, updating and deletion of group content is restricted to certain roles
within the group.

> In Drupal core the entity CRUD operations are defined as simple strings (e.g.

Reviewer: Active language
```suggestion
Drupal core defines the entity CRUD operations as simple strings (e.g.
```

an for an 'article' node type we would have the permission `delete own article
content`).

OG not only supports nodes but all kinds of entities, and the simple string
based permissions from Drupal core have proved to be difficult to use for
operations that need to be applicable across multiple entity types. Some typical
use cases are that a group administrator should be able to edit and delete all
group content, regardless of entity type. Also a normal member of a group might
have the permission to edit their own content, but not the content of other
members.

> The permission system from Drupal core does not lend itself well to these use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Drupal core's permission system doesn't lend itself well to these use
```

cases since we cannot reliably derive the entity type and operation from these
simple string based permissions. For example the permission `delete own article
content` gives a user the permission to delete nodes of type 'article' which
were created by themselves. This permission string contains the words 'delete'
and 'own' so it would be possible to come up with an algorithm that infers the
operation and the scope, but the bundle and entity type can not be derived
easily. In fact the entity type 'node' doesn't even appear in the string!

> In OG this is solved by defining group content entity operation (CRUD)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OG solves this by defining group content entity operation (CRUD)
```

permissions using a structured object: `GroupContentOperationPermission`. The
above permission would be defined as follows, which encodes all the data we need
to determine the entity type, bundle, operation, ownership (whether or not a
user is performing the operation on their own entity), etc:

```php
$permission = new \Drupal\og\GroupContentOperationPermission([
  'entity_type' => 'node',
  'bundle' => 'article',
  'name' => "delete own article content",
  'title' => $this->t('%type_name: Delete own content', ['type_name' => 'article']),
  'operation' => 'delete',
  'owner' => TRUE,
]);
```

These permissions are defined in the same way as the group level permissions, in
an event listener for the `og.permissions` event. Here are some examples how OG
sets these permissions:

- `OgEventSubscriber::getDefaultEntityOperationPermissions()`: creates a generic
  set of permissions for every group content type. These can be overridden by

>   custom modules if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  set of permissions for every group content type. These can be overridden by
  custom modules as shown below.
```

- `OgEventSubscriber::provideDefaultNodePermissions()`: an example of how the
  generic permissions can be overridden. This ensures that we can use the same
  permission names for the Node entity type in our group content as the ones
  used by core.

Granting permissions to users
-----------------------------

Similar to Drupal core, permissions are not directly assigned to users in OG,
but they are assigned to roles, and a user can have one or more roles in a
group.

The role data is stored in a config entity type named `OgRole`, and whenever a

> new group type is created, a number of roles will automatically be created:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new group type is created, the following roles will automatically be created:
```

- `member` and `non-member`: these two roles are required for every group, they
  indicate whether or not a user is a member.
- `administrator`: this role is not strictly required but is created by default
  by OG because it is considered to be generally useful for most groups.
- Developers can choose to provide additional default roles by listening to the
  `og.default_role` event.

Whenever a default role is created, it will automatically inherit the
permissions that are assigned to the role in their permission declaration (see

> the `default role` property above which takes an array of roles to which these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `default roles` property above which takes an array of roles to which these
```

permissions should be applied).

To manually assign a permission to a role for a certain group, it can be done as
follows:

```php
// OgRole::loadByGroupAndName() is the easiest way to load a specific role for
// a given group.
$admin_role = OgRole::loadByGroupAndName($this->group, OgRoleInterface::ADMINISTRATOR);
$admin_role->grantPermission('my permission')->save();
````

Similarly, an existing permission can be removed from a role by calling

> `$admin_role->revokePermission('my permission')` and saving the role entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`$admin_role->revokePermission('my permission')` and saving the `OgRole` entity.
```

For more information on how `OgRole` objects are handled, check the following
methods:
- `\Drupal\og\GroupTypeManager::addGroup()`: this code is responsible for

>   creating a new group type and will create the roles as part of it.

Reviewer: Group types may be worth a separate section?

Author: I suppose this would be for a separate document, since this is focused only on access and permissions.

Reviewer: Indeed

- `\Drupal\og\OgRoleManager::getDefaultRoles()`: creates the default roles and
  fires the event listener that modules can hook into the provide additional
  default roles.
- `\Drupal\og\EventSubscriber\OgEventSubscriber::provideDefaultRoles()`: OG's

>   own implementation of the event listener, which provides the `administrator`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  own implementation of the event listener, which provides the default `administrator`
```

  role.

Checking if a user has a certain permission in a group
------------------------------------------------------

It would be natural to think that checking a permission would be a simple matter
of loading the `OgRole` entity and calling `$role->hasPermission()` on it, but
this is not sufficient. There are a number of additional things to consider:

- The super user (user ID 1) has full permissions.
- OG has a configuration option to allow full access to group owners.
- Users that have the global permission `administer organic groups` have all
  permissions in all groups.
- The role can have the `is_admin` flag set which will grant all permissions.
- Modules can alter permissions depending on their own requirements.

Organic Groups provides a service that will perform these checks. To determine
whether the currently logged in user has for example the `manage members`
permission on a given group entity:

```php
// Load some custom group.

> $group = \Drupal::entityTypeManager()->getStorage('my_group_type')->load($some_id);

Reviewer: 'my_group_type': this could do with some explanation on the entity bundle or what defines a group type
I think we should cover the group type in a separate section

Author: Yeah it is just an entity type, I didn't want to put `node` here or any other existing entity type since we are entity type agnostic. I agree that we can use a similar document to explain how to programmatically work with group types and group content types.

/** @var \Drupal\og\OgAccessInterface $og_access */
$og_access = \Drupal::service('og.access');
$access_result = $og_access->userAccess($group, 'manage members');

> // An access result object is returned including full cacheability metadata. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// An AccessResult object is returned including full cacheability metadata. In
```

// order to get the access as a simple boolean value, call `::isAllowed()`.
if ($access_result->isAllowed()) {
  // The user has permission.
}
```

For projects that have a large number of group types and group content types
there is also a convenient method `::userAccessEntity()` to discover if a user
has a group level permission on any given entity, being a group, group content,
or even something that is not related to any group:

```php
// Load some entity, which might be a group, group content, or something not
// related to any group.
$entity = \Drupal::entityTypeManager()->getStorage('my_entity_type')->load($some_id);

/** @var \Drupal\og\OgAccessInterface $og_access */
$og_access = \Drupal::service('og.access');
$access_result = $og_access->userAccessEntity('manage members', $entity);

> // An access result object is returned including full cacheability metadata. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// An AccessResult object is returned including full cacheability metadata. In
```

// order to get the access as a simple boolean value, call `::isAllowed()`.
if ($access_result->isAllowed()) {
  // The user has permission.
}
```

> The above example will do a discovery to find out if the passed in entity is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Caution**: The above example will do a discovery to find out if the passed in entity is a
```

group or group content, and will loop over all associated groups to determine
access. While this is very convenient this also comes with a performance impact,
so it is recommended to use it only in cases where the faster `::userAccess()`
is not applicable.

Checking if a user can perform an entity operation on group content
-------------------------------------------------------------------

> OG extends the entity access control system from Drupal core so checking access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OG extends Drupal core's entity access control system so checking access
```

equivalent to calling the following:

```php
/** @var \Drupal\og\OgAccessInterface $og_access */
$og_access = \Drupal::service('og.access');
$access_result = $og_access->userAccessEntityOperation('update', $group_content_entity, $user);
```

There is also a faster way to get the same result, in case you know beforehand
to which group the group content entity belongs. The following example is more
efficient since it doesn't need to do an expensive discovery of the groups to
which the entity belongs:

```php
// In case we know the group entity we can use the faster method:
$group_entity = \Drupal::entityTypeManager()->getStorage('my_group_type')->load($some_id);

/** @var \Drupal\og\OgAccessInterface $og_access */
$og_access = \Drupal::service('og.access');
$access_result = $og_access->userAccessGroupContentEntityOperation('update', $group_entity, $group_content_entity, $user);
```

Altering permissions
--------------------

There are many use cases where permissions should be altered under some
circumstances to fulfill business requirements. OG offers ways for modules to
hook into the permission system and alter the access result.

> Modules can implement `hook_og_user_access_alter()` to alter group level

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Alter group permissions

Modules can implement `hook_og_user_access_alter()` to alter group level
```

how to alter the cacheability metadata to include the config setting. The access
result is different if this option is turned on or off, so this needs to be
included in the cache metadata.

```php
function mymodule_og_user_access_alter(array &$permissions, CacheableMetadata $cacheable_metadata, array $context): void {
  // Retrieve the module configuration.
  $config = \Drupal::config('mymodule.settings');

  // Check if the site is configured to allow deletion of published groups.
  $published_groups_can_be_deleted = $config->get('delete_published_groups');

  // If deletion is not allowed and the group is published, revoke the
  // permission.
  $group = $context['group'];
  if ($group instanceof EntityPublishedInterface && !$group->isPublished() && !$published_groups_can_be_deleted) {
    $key = array_search(OgAccess::DELETE_GROUP_PERMISSION, $permissions);
    if ($key !== FALSE) {
      unset($permissions[$key]);
    }
  }

  // Since our access result depends on our custom module configuration, we need
  // to add it to the cache metadata.
  $cacheable_metadata->addCacheableDependency($config);
}
```

> In addition to altering group level permissions, OG also allows to alter access

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Alter group content permissions

In addition to altering group level permissions, OG also allows to alter access
```

which the entity belongs:

```php
// In case we know the group entity we can use the faster method:
$group_entity = \Drupal::entityTypeManager()->getStorage('my_group_type')->load($some_id);

/** @var \Drupal\og\OgAccessInterface $og_access */
$og_access = \Drupal::service('og.access');
$access_result = $og_access->userAccessGroupContentEntityOperation('update', $group_entity, $group_content_entity, $user);
```

Altering permissions
--------------------

There are many use cases where permissions should be altered under some
circumstances to fulfill business requirements. OG offers ways for modules to
hook into the permission system and alter the access result.

Modules can implement `hook_og_user_access_alter()` to alter group level
permissions. Here is an example that implements a use case where groups can only
be deleted if they are unpublished. This functionality can be toggled off by
site administrators in the site configuration, so the example also demonstrates
how to alter the cacheability metadata to include the config setting. The access
result is different if this option is turned on or off, so this needs to be
included in the cache metadata.

```php

> function mymodule_og_user_access_alter(array &$permissions, CacheableMetadata $cacheable_metadata, array $context): void {

Reviewer 2: @pfrenssen Lovely explanation!

I wonder if there's a good reason to keep an alter hook on the group access, but provide event subscriber for the group content access? (If you've written it in one of the issues, sorry if I've missed it)

Author: Very good point, there is an issue to convert it from a hook to an event: #686 but in this PR I wanted to document just the current situation. It might take some time before we get round to implementing that issue.

Reviewer 2: :+1:
